---
layout: post
title: Citiparks Cleaning FAQ
permalink: /cleaning
featured: true
faqs: 
  -
    question: Where can I see the RFP?
    answer: "You can see the full text and leave comments/questions <a href='./rfp'>here.</a><p>The full text is also available for <a href='http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/omb/RFP_Cleaning_Service_PR_-_FINAL_FINAL.pdf'>PDF download</a></p>"
  -
    question: What's the contract for?
    answer: "This RFP will address the City of Pittsburgh’s need for regular, efficient and effective custodial and cleaning services for the 22 recreation and Healthy Active Living (senior) centers specified in this document. These facilities, ranging from 2,000 – 15,000 sq. ft. have basic custodial needs that must be addressed multiple times each week by a custodial contractor. Regular custodial duties include, but are not limited to: 
      <ul>
        <li>Floor mopping sweeping</li>
        <li>Carpet vacuuming</li>
        <li>Equipment and furnishing dusting</li>
        <li>Trash collection mitigation, including collection and removal</li>
        <li>Disinfecting of equipment, kitchens, eating areas and restrooms</li>
        <li>Window and mirror washing</li>
        <li>Litter picking</li>
        <li>Dispenser replenishing</li>
        <li>Wipe down of desks, tables, equipment and furniture</li>
        <li>Light bulb replacement</li>
        <li>Other light duties, as assigned</li>
      </ul>"
  - 
    question: What time of day and how many times a week will each facility need to be serviced?
    answer: Each facility will need to be cleaned and serviced after hours, 3 days a week. In general, Senior Centers can be cleaned in the evenings after 5pm, and recreations centers in the early morning or after 9pm. Specific operation times are listed in the facility analysis in the <a href='http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/omb/RFP_Cleaning_Service_PR_-_FINAL_FINAL.pdf'>PDF version of the RFP.</a>
  - 
    question: What about supplies?
    answer: All cleaning supplies will be provided by Citiparks, including trash bags, cleaning solutions, mops, brooms, rags, soap, lightbulbs and paper products.
  - 
    question: How long is the contract term?
    answer: The term of any agreement will be between one and three years.
  - 
    question: How big is each facility?
    answer: Facility specifications are available in the facility analysis section of the <a href='http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/omb/RFP_Cleaning_Service_PR_-_FINAL_FINAL.pdf'>PDF version of the RFP.</a>
  - 
    question: Where are the facilities?
    answer: <iframe width='100%' height='520' frameborder='0' src='http://cfa.cartodb.com/viz/73ba7344-d720-11e4-a785-0e853d047bba/embed_map' allowfullscreen webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen oallowfullscreen msallowfullscreen></iframe>
  - 
    question: How many facilities can I bid on?
    answer: You can bid on as few as 4 facilities and as many as the entire 22.
  - 
    question: What will I need to submit?
    answer: "You will need to submit a sealed proposal with specifications for all facilities you would like to bid on. Specific regarding format and contact information can accessed in the <a href='http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/omb/RFP_Cleaning_Service_PR_-_FINAL_FINAL.pdf'>PDF version of the RFP</a>, but here's a brief rundown of what should be in the proposal:
    <ul>
      <li><strong>Letter of Transmittal:</strong> A statement indicating your understanding of the work to be performed, your qualifications, the name of the contact person at your company and where they can be reached, and a statement of any potential relationships with City employees.</li>
      <li><strong>Profile of Respondent:</strong> Should be a brief statement indicating the Respondent’s experience in conducting work of the nature sought by this RFP. Advertising brochures of the Respondent may be submitted as a part of this profile as long as the brochures specifically address the experience of the Respondent related to the work to be performed. Additionally, this profile should include the location of the office service will be provided from as well as any other information that relates to the capabilities of your company to do the required work.</li>
      <li><strong>Explanation of Work to be Performed:</strong> A detailed description of the methods and procedures you will use to do the required work.</li>
      <li><strong>Cost:</strong> Should be based on the hours of work provided, not including travel.</li>
      <li><strong>Other:</strong> Non-Discrimination Certification (Appendix A); MBE, WBE & Veteran-Owned Solicitation and Commitment Form (Appendix B)</li>
    </ul>"
  - 
    question: "How will my response be evaluated?"
    answer: "Again, more details will be provided with the RFP, but here's the evaluation breakdown:
    <ul>
      <li>Technical Expertise & Experience: 20%</li>
      <li>Procedures and Methods: 15%</li>
      <li>Cost: 50%</li>
      <li>Location: 5%</li>
      <li>Past Work Experience: 10%</li>
    </ul>"
  - 
    question: Is there a wage requirement?
    answer: Actual wage rates will be finalized in the contract negotiations. A good estimate for the prevailing wage for cleaners working for the City of Pittsburgh as a result of this RFP would be approximately $15.45 /hr plus $4.68/hr for benefits. For more on this, see the <a href="http://apps.pittsburghpa.gov/omb/2014_Building_Service_Prevailing_Wage.pdf">2014 Prevailing Wages and Benefits document.</a>
  - 
    question: Is there a bid bond requirement?
    answer: There is no bid bond requirement.
  - 
    question: What about insurance requirements?
    answer: "The standard insurance coverage required by the City of Pittsburgh for professional services contracts is as follows:
      <ul>
        <li>All insurance must be on an occurrence basis, not a claims-made basis</li>
        <li>The City must be listed as an additional named insured, not merely as a certificate holder</li>
        <li>Insurance should provide 30 days cancellation notice</li>
        <li>The Respondent shall provide an insurance certificate showing that it meets the requirements</li>
        <li>Worker’s Compensation shall meet statutory requirements</li>
        <li>General liability (including property damage and bodily injury), automobile liability and professional liability shall be provided in the following amounts:</li> 
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th align='left'>Public liability and property damage</th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>Bodily injury, including death and property</td> 
              <td>$500,000.00 per occurrence</td> 
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>Damage combined</td>
              <td>$1,000,000.00 aggregate</td>
            </tr>
          </table>
          <table>
            <tr>
              <th align='left'>Automobile Liability and Property Damage</th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>Bodily injury, including death and property</td>
              <td>$500,000.00 per occurrence</td> 
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>Damage combined</td>
              <td>$1,000,000.00 aggregate</td>
            </tr>
          </table>
        </ul>"
  - 
    question: What's the timeline?
    answer: "<p>Anticipated schedule, subject to change:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>April 8, 2015: RFP Issued</li>
          <li>April 17, 2015: Deadline for applying firms to submit questions</li>
          <li>April 22, 2015: Deadline for Citiparks to respond to questions</li>
          <li>May 8, 2015: Proposals due</li>
          <li>May 15, 2015: Respondents Notified of initial outcome</li>
          <li>August 5, 2015: RFP process will be completed RFI to the Department of Parks & Recreation</li>
        </ul>"
  - 
    question: What if I have another question?
    answer: No problem! Email your questions to <a href='mailto:louann.horan@pittsburghpa.gov'>louann.horan@pittsburghpa.gov</a> by April 17th, 2015. We'll post additional questions and their answers online."
---


## CITY OF PITTSBURGH

### **REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP)**

### City of Pittsburgh Department of Parks & Recreation 

### Cleaning and Custodial Services for Citiparks Facilities

The Pittsburgh Department of Parks & Recreation (Citiparks) is accepting proposals for a contract to perform custodial and cleaning services at Citiparks’ twenty-two (22) recreation and Healthy Active Living (Senior) centers. Attached is information for submitting a proposal including specific requirements, the organization of the proposal, proposal evaluation criteria, and a proposed contractual agreement for 1 – 3 years.  

**Sealed proposals (three hard copies and one digital copy) must be received no later than noon May 8, 2015. Postmarks are not sufficient. Proposals by fax or email are not acceptable**.  

Any questions or Requests for Information (RFI) related to the proposal must be received in writing by April 17, 2015.  All questions will be documented: both questions and answers will be available to the public online at www.pittsburghpa.gov/Citiparks by April 22, 2015.  

Contact person for all inquiries and for submission of proposals:  


Ms. Louann Horan, Manager of Operations and Administration  
Department of Parks & Recreation  
City of Pittsburgh  
Fifth Floor, City-County Building, Room 459  
414 Grant Street  
Pittsburgh, PA 15219  
412 255-2362  
Louann.Horan@PittsburghPA.gov

###SECTION 1. BACKGROUND

The Pittsburgh Department of Parks & Recreation (Citiparks) is seeking proposals to provide custodial and cleaning service at 22 facilities, including ten (10) recreation centers and twelve (12) Healthy Active Living (senior) centers.  

Citiparks is the department within the City of Pittsburgh that provides parks programming for children, adults and seniors.  In addition to recreational instruction, Citiparks’ provides wellness, fitness, cultural, art and educational enrichment for city residents as well as conducting a wide variety of special events for families and communities throughout the city.  

This Request for Proposals specifically addresses the City of Pittsburgh’s need for regular, efficient and effective custodial and cleaning services for the 22 recreation and Healthy Active Living (senior) centers specified in this document.  These facilities, ranging from 2,000 – 15,000 sq. ft. have basic custodial needs that must be addressed multiple times each week by a custodial contractor.

Regular custodial duties include, but are not limited to:

* Floor mopping sweeping

* Carpet vacuuming

* Equipment and furnishing dusting

* Trash collection mitigation, including collection and removal

* Disinfecting of equipment, kitchens, eating areas and restrooms

* Window and mirror washing

* Litter picking

* Dispenser replenishing

* Wipe down of desks, tables, equipment and furniture

* Light bulb replacement 

* Other light duties, as assigned.


In lieu of an established fee, Citiparks is seeking proposals that provide an hourly rate for providing the services above for as few as four specific facilities and as many as all 22 facilities.  Respondents may group facilities in any manner that they deem most appropriate and may also provide multiple proposals based on varying grouping patterns or number of facilities to be served.

Respondents should be aware that Citiparks would anticipate approximately six (6) hours of custodial service per week will be required, on average, not including travel per facility

###SECTION 2. REQUIREMENTS

####**A. General**

 All Respondents are bound by the deadline and location requirements of this RFP as previously stated in the announcement.

 All proposals shall remain effective subject to CITIPARKS review and approval, for a period of ninety (90) days from the deadline for submitting proposals.

 Citiparks may initiate negotiations with one or more firm submitting proposals during the ninety (90) day period that proposals must remain effective.

* The Respondents is encouraged to add to, modify or clarify any of the scope of work items it deems appropriate to obtain a high quality plan at the lowest possible cost.

* All changes should be listed and explained. However, the scope of work proposed, at minimum, must accomplish the goals and work outlined.  

Citiparks reserves and may exercise the following rights and options with respect to this selection process:

1. To reject any and all proposals and re-issue the RFP at any time prior to execution of a final contract, if, in Citiparks‘ opinion, it is in the best interest of the City to do so.

2. To supplement, amend, substitute, or otherwise modify this RFP at any time prior to selection of one or more Respondents for negotiation and to cancel this RFP with or without issuing another RFP.

3. To reject the proposal of any Respondents who, in Citiparks’ sole judgment, has been delinquent or unfaithful in the performance of any contract with the City, is financially or technically not capable or is otherwise not a responsible Respondent.

4. To reject non-responsive any proposal which, in Citiparks’ sole judgment, is incomplete, is not in conformity with applicable law, is conditional in any way, or deviates from the mandated requirements of the RFP.

5. To waive any informality, defect, non-responsiveness and/or deviation from this RFP that is not, in Citiparks’ sole judgment, material to the proposal.

####**B. Conflict of Interest**

Respondents, by submission of a proposal to this RFP, agree that they presently have no interest and shall not have any interest, direct or indirect, which would conflict in any manner with the performance of the services required under this RFP.  

####**C. Scope of Services**

Citiparks hereby engages Respondent to perform the following described work, and Respondent hereby agrees to perform said work upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. Specifically Respondent will perform the services outlines below, when and as directed.  

All cleaning supplies will be provided by Citiparks, including trash bags, cleaning solutions, mops, brooms, rags, soap, lightbulbs and paper products.  

The following tasks within the process are expected to be completed by the Respondent during each visit, if directed: 

####1. Tasks may include, but are not limited to the following:  
    
1. Cleaning of restroom equipment including urinals, commodes, sinks, grab bars, partitions, garbage cans, wall and any other surface within the restroom.  Restroom must be free of dust, dirt, bodily fluids or excrements, as well as have evidence that surfaces were disinfected.  

2. Water fountains will be free of particle and dirt and show evidence that they were disinfected.  

3. Interior windows, mirrors, window ledges and partitions will be free of all particles, smudges and dust.

4. Hard surfaces, such as and including but not limited to, counters, hand rails, kitchen equipment, refrigerators, sinks, basins, stove tops and equipment will be free of dirt, dust and other particles and show evidence that they were sanitized.

5. Floors, stairs, stairwells, ramps will be free of dirt, dust and debris and show evidence that they were disinfected with clean water and appropriate cleaning solution.  
  
6. Carpeted areas will be free of dirt, litter and debris.  
  
7. Garbage will be bagged and carried to area designated for disposal.  

8. Wastepaper baskets will contain new place liners provided by Citiparks. 

9. Paper towel and toilet tissue dispensers will be filled with appropriate paper products.

10. Locker rooms, showers, drains will be free of dust, dirt, hair and show evidence that they were disinfected.

11. Weight room equipment will show evidence that they were disinfected.

12. Light bulbs at a height of less than 10’ will be replaced in all sockets, as necessary.

13. Gymnasium floors will be dust mopped and spot cleaned with a damp mop (water only).

14. Televisions, computers, and consoles will be wiped free of dust and dirt.

15. The custodial closet and sink will be clean and free of dirt and debris with no water in buckets or sinks and mops, rags and other cleaning tools properly cleansed stored and hung to dry.

16. Other tasks, as assigned.

####2. Respondents may articulate any specific task that would be excluded from the "Other tasks" category in their response.*

####3. Locations of Citiparks’ facilities to be serviced:*

1. Brighton Heights Healthy Active Living Center

2. Jefferson Recreation Center

3. Northside Healthy Active Living Center

4. Homewood Healthy Active Living Center

5. Lawrenceville Healthy Active Living Center

6. Morningside Healthy Active Living Center

7. Paulson Recreation Center

8. Arlington Recreation Center

9. Phillips Recreation Center

10. Brookline Recreation Center

11. Warrington Recreation Center

12. Beechview Healthy Active Living Center

13. Mt. Washington Healthy Active Living Center

14. Sheraden Healthy Active Living Center

15. West End Healthy Active Living Center

16. Greenfield Healthy Active Living Center

17. Magee Recreation Center

18. Hazelwood Healthy Active Living Center

19. Ammon Recreation Center

20. West Penn Recreation Center

21. Ormsby Recreation Center

22. Southside Market House Healthy Active Living Center

####4. The Glen Hazel Healthy Active Living Center and the Northview Heights Healthy Active Living Center are not included in this RFP.*

####**D. Term of Services**

The term of any agreement will be between one and three years.

###SECTION 3. ORGANIZATION AND REQUIRED SUBMITTALS FOR PROPOSAL

####**A. Letter of Transmittal**

This letter should include:

* A statement indicating the Respondent’s understanding of the work to be performed;

* An affirmation of the Respondent’s qualifications for professionally and expertly conducting the work as understood;

* The Respondent's contact person concerning the proposal and a telephone number where that person can be reached; and,

* A clear statement of the Respondent’s, and/or the principals of the Respondent, relationship(s) with, or knowledge of any officials or employees of the City, and the nature of this relationship or knowledge.

 Failure to clearly state and fully disclose any of the information required in the letter of transmittal shall be grounds for the City to reject the proposal

####**B. Profile of Respondent**

The Respondent profile should be a brief statement indicating the Respondent’s experience in conducting work of the nature sought by this RFP.  Advertising brochures of the Respondent may be submitted as a part of this profile as long as the brochures specifically address the experience of the Respondent related to the work to be performed.  Additionally, this profile should include:

* the location of the Respondent's office that will provide the proposed services,

* any other information may be included if it relates to the capabilities and expertise of the firm in doing comparable work.

####**C. Explanation of Work to be Performed**

 The proposal must include a detailed description of the procedures and methods Respondent proposes to use to complete the work requested by Citiparks.  This is important because the methods and procedures proposed will receive primary consideration in evaluating each proposal.  Examples of similar work will be helpful and may be included.

####**D. Cost**

The cost shall be based on the hours of work provided, not including travel.

*Minority Business Enterprises (MBEs), Women’s Business Enterprises (WBEs) & Veteran-Owned Business participation should be clearly indicated.*

Respondent’s method of billing must be indicated.  The preferred practice of the City of Pittsburgh is regular invoicing, but not more than once per month.  Regardless of the billing method used, 10% of the total contract price will be withheld until the final product is approved.

####**E. Other Submittals  **

Additionally, documents attached as appendices to this RFP shall be fully executed and returned with the proposal as follows:

* Non-Discrimination Certification (Appendix A)

* MBE, WBE & Veteran-Owned Solicitation and Commitment Form (Appendix B)

###SECTION 4. EVALUATION CRITERIA

All proposals will be evaluated based on the following:

**1. Technical Expertise and Experience (20%)**

The technical expertise and experience of the Respondent will be determined by the following factors:

* The overall experience of the Respondent in conducting similar work that is to be provided to the City of Pittsburgh.

* The clarity and completeness of the proposal and the apparent general understanding of the work to be performed.

**2. Procedures and Methods (15%)**

The methods and procedures proposed to be utilized to conduct the work requested as they relate to thoroughness and objectiveness will be of primary importance in evaluating proposals.  This includes evaluation of the soundness of the approach relative to the techniques for collecting and analyzing data, sequence and relationships of major steps, and methods for managing the work to ensure timely and orderly completion. 

**3. Cost (50%)**

All costs must be taken into account and proposals will be evaluated proportionately to the values proposed. All proposals must give a cost per hour, even if there is a two-hour minimum.

**4. Location (5%)**

Preference will be given to firms based on the proximity of staff and Respondents’ to the City and Allegheny County. 

**5. Past Work Experience and References (10%)**

Past work experience with the City of Pittsburgh and references will be considered. 

**6. City of Pittsburgh MBE, WBE & Veteran’s-Owned Small Business Goals**

The City of Pittsburgh goals are 18 % Minority Business Enterprises (MBEs) and 7% Women Business Enterprises (WBEs) participation (Appendix A).  The degree to which the proposal meets or otherwise addresses these goals will be considered in addition to the evaluation criteria listed above.

In addition, the City of Pittsburgh has an annual goal of not less than 5% participation by veteran-owned small businesses in all contracts. The participation goal shall apply to the overall dollar amount expended with respect to contracts. The City/Citiparks therefore, requires that all Respondents demonstrate good faith efforts to obtain the participation of veteran-owned small businesses in work to be performed under the contemplated City contract. In order to demonstrate this good faith commitment, all Respondents are required to complete and submit with their proposals an MBE/WBE/Veteran Owned Solicitation and Commitment Form (Appendix B), which details the efforts made by the Respondents to obtain such participation.

A. Veteran-owned small business is defined by the City as a business having 100 or fewer full-time employees and not less than 51% of which is owned by one (1) or more veterans, or in the case of any publicly-owned business, not less than 51% of the stock of which is owned by one (1) or more veterans, and the management and daily business operations of which are controlled by one (1) or more veterans.

B. For contracts under one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), veteran-owned small businesses shall be exempt from all bonding requirements.

**7. Prevailing Wage**

The City of Pittsburgh has set a policy as it relates to firms providing for Prevailing Wages to its workers.  That policy is articulated in Appendix E. and Respondents are expected to adhere to that policy.

All, or selected, Respondents submitting proposals may be invited to interviews explaining their proposal. At this time, Respondents will provide an overview of their proposal to a committee consisting of the Director of Citiparks, staff members from Citiparks, and a member of the Office of Management and Budget.

###SECTION 5. CONTRACT

A. The selected Respondent will be required to enter into a contract with the City of Pittsburgh ("City"), contingent upon prior authorization of City Council.  The contract shall be directed and managed by the Department of Parks & Recreation (Citiparks).

B. The City can neither process invoices nor approve payments until the contract has been fully executed by all City signatories.  Citiparks has no legal authority to authorize commencement of work until the contract is fully executed.

C. City laws and policies mandate the incorporation of various terms and conditions into all City contracts.  For this reason, the City will not sign any standard contract of the respondent.

D. The City requires all Respondents to indemnify the City by including the following clause in all City contracts:

*The Respondent hereby agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the City, its officers, agents, and employees against liens, charges, claims, demands, losses, costs, judgments, liabilities, and damages of every kind and nature whatsoever, including court costs and legal fees, arising by reason of: the performance by the Respondent or/and services under this Agreement; any act, error or omission of the Respondent or of any agent, employee, licensee, Respondent, or sub-Respondent; or any breach by the Respondent of any of the terms, conditions, or provisions of this Agreement.  The Respondent shall indemnify and save harmless the City against and from any and all claims and liabilities whatsoever on account of, or by reason of, or growing out of personal injuries or death to any person, including the Respondent and its employees, whether the same results from the actual or alleged negligence of the City or the City’s agents or employees or otherwise, it being the intent of the provision to absolve and protect the City of Pittsburgh from any and all loss by reason of the premises or anything related in any way whatsoever to the contract.  The Respondent shall supply evidence of insurance satisfactory to the City covering the liabilities and indemnification required by the contract.*

1. The standard insurance coverage required by the City of Pittsburgh for   professional services contracts is as follows:

* All insurance must be on an occurrence basis, not a claims-made basis;

* The City must be listed as an additional named insured, not merely as a certificate holder;

* Insurance should provide 30 days cancellation notice.

* The Respondent shall provide an insurance certificate showing that it meets the requirements;

* Worker’s Compensation shall meet statutory requirements;

* General liability (including property damage and bodily injury), automobile liability and professional liability shall be provided in the following amounts:

**Public liability and property damage**
Bodily injury, including death and property: $500,000.00 per occurrence
Damage combined: $1,000,000.00 aggregate

**Automobile Liability and Property Damage**
Bodily injury, including death and property $500,000.00 per occurrence
Damage combined: $1,000,000.00 aggregate
